II. THE PAUPER WITCH OF GRAFTON

  Now that they’ve got it settled whose I be,
  I’m going to tell them something they won’t like:
  They’ve got it settled wrong, and I can prove it.
  Flattered I must be to have two towns fighting
  To make a present of me to each other.
  They don’t dispose me, either one of them,
  To spare them any trouble. Double trouble’s
  Always the witch’s motto anyway.
  I’ll double theirs for both of them—you watch me.
  They’ll find they’ve got the whole thing to do over,
  That is, if facts is what they want to go by.
  They set a lot (now don’t they?) by a record
  Of Arthur Amy’s having once been up
  For Hog Reeve in March Meeting here in Warren.
  I could have told them any time this twelvemonth
  The Arthur Amy I was married to
  Couldn’t have been the one they say was up
  In Warren at March Meeting for the reason
  He wa’n’t but fifteen at the time they say.
  The Arthur Amy I was married to
  Voted the only times he ever voted,
  Which wasn’t many, in the town of Wentworth.
  One of the times was when ’twas in the warrant
  To see if the town wanted to take over
  The tote road to our clearing where we lived.
  I’ll tell you who’d remember—Heman Lapish.
  Their Arthur Amy was the father of mine.
  So now they’ve dragged it through the law courts once
  I guess they’d better drag it through again.
  Wentworth and Warren’s both good towns to live in,
  Only I happen to prefer to live
  In Wentworth from now on; and when all’s said,
  Right’s right, and the temptation to do right
  When I can hurt someone by doing it
  Has always been too much for me, it has.
  I know of some folks that’d be set up
  At having in their town a noted witch:
  But most would have to think of the expense
  That even I would be. They ought to know
  That as a witch I’d often milk a bat
  And that’d be enough to last for days.
  It’d make my position stronger, think,
  If I was to consent to give some sign
  To make it surer that I was a witch?
  It wa’n’t no sign, I s’pose, when Mallice Huse
  Said that I took him out in his old age
  And rode all over everything on him
  Until I’d had him worn to skin and bones.
  And if I’d left him hitched unblanketed
  In front of one Town Hall, I’d left him hitched
  In front of every one in Grafton County.
  Some cried shame on me not to blanket him,
  The poor old man. It would have been all right
  If some one hadn’t said to gnaw the posts
  He stood beside and leave his trade mark on them,
  So they could recognize them. Not a post
  That they could hear tell of was scarified.
  They made him keep on gnawing till he whined.
  Then that same smarty someone said to look—
  He’d bet Huse was a cribber and had gnawed
  The crib he slept in—and as sure’s you’re born
  They found he’d gnawed the four posts of his bed,
  All four of them to splinters. What did that prove?
  Not that he hadn’t gnawed the hitching posts
  He said he had besides. Because a horse
  Gnaws in the stable ain’t no proof to me
  He don’t gnaw trees and posts and fences too.
  But everybody took it for a proof.
  I was a strapping girl of twenty then.
  The smarty someone who spoiled everything
  Was Arthur Amy. You know who he was.
  That was the way he started courting me.
  He never said much after we were married,
  But I mistrusted he was none too proud
  Of having interfered in the Huse business.
  I guess he found he got more out of me
  By having me a witch. Or something happened
  To turn him round. He got to saying things
  To undo what he’d done and make it right,
  Like, “No, she ain’t come back from kiting yet.
  Last night was one of her nights out. She’s kiting.
  She thinks when the wind makes a night of it
  She might as well herself.” But he liked best
  To let on he was plagued to death with me:
  If anyone had seen me coming home
  Over the ridgepole, ’stride of a broomstick,
  As often as he had in the tail of the night,
  He guessed they’d know what he had to put up with.
  Well, I showed Arthur Amy signs enough
  Off from the house as far as we could keep
  And from barn smells you can’t wash out of ploughed ground
  With all the rain and snow of seven years;
  And I don’t mean just skulls of Roger’s Rangers
  On Moosilauke, but woman signs to man,
  Only bewitched so I would last him longer.
  Up where the trees grow short, the mosses tall,
  I made him gather me wet snow berries
  On slippery rocks beside a waterfall.
  I made him do it for me in the dark.
  And he liked everything I made him do.
  I hope if he is where he sees me now
  He’s so far off he can’t see what I’ve come to.
  You _can_ come down from everything to nothing.
  All is, if I’d a-known when I was young
  And full of it, that this would be the end,
  It doesn’t seem as if I’d had the courage
  To make so free and kick up in folks’ faces.
  I might have, but it doesn’t seem as if.