A STAR IN A STONE-BOAT
                       (_For Lincoln MacVeagh_)


  Never tell me that not one star of all
  That slip from heaven at night and softly fall
  Has been picked up with stones to build a wall.

  Some laborer found one faded and stone cold,
  And saving that its weight suggested gold,
  And tugged it from his first too certain hold,

  He noticed nothing in it to remark.
  He was not used to handling stars thrown dark
  And lifeless from an interrupted arc.

  He did not recognize in that smooth coal
  The one thing palpable besides the soul
  To penetrate the air in which we roll.

  He did not see how like a flying thing
  It brooded ant-eggs, and had one large wing,
  One not so large for flying in a ring,

  And a long Bird of Paradise’s tail,
  (Though these when not in use to fly and trail
  It drew back in its body like a snail);

  Nor know that he might move it from the spot
  The harm was done; from having been star-shot
  The very nature of the soil was hot

  And burning to yield flowers instead of grain,
  Flowers fanned and not put out by all the rain
  Poured on them by his prayers prayed in vain.

  He moved it roughly with an iron bar,
  He loaded an old stone-boat with the star
  And not, as you might think, a flying car,

  Such as even poets would admit perforce
  More practical than Pegasus the horse
  If it could put a star back in its course.

  He dragged it through the ploughed ground at a pace
  But faintly reminiscent of the race
  Of jostling rock in interstellar space.

  It went for building stone, and I, as though
  Commanded in a dream, forever go
  To right the wrong that this should have been so.

  Yet ask where else it could have gone as well,
  I do not know—I cannot stop to tell:
  He might have left it lying where it fell.

  From following walls I never lift my eye
  Except at night to places in the sky
  Where showers of charted meteors let fly.

  Some may know what they seek in school and church,
  And why they seek it there; for what I search
  I must go measuring stone walls, perch on perch;

  Sure that though not a star of death and birth,
  So not to be compared, perhaps, in worth
  To such resorts of life as Mars and Earth,

  Though not, I say, a star of death and sin,
  It yet has poles, and only needs a spin
  To show its worldly nature and begin

  To chafe and shuffle in my calloused palm
  And run off in strange tangents with my arm
  As fish do with the line in first alarm.

  Such as it is, it promises the prize
  Of the one world complete in any size
  That I am like to compass, fool or wise.